so the title of my talk today will be
fundamental frequencies I'm not going to
talk a lot about my work actually I'm
gonna talk more about my motivations so
I'd like to start with a very quick
overview of what I've been up to over
the last 15 years so I am an artist and
researcher working with emerging
technologies particularly with software
and algorithms that's kind of where my
kind of knowledge lies and specifically
with computation but a more broader
sense I think of computation as as a
language for transformation as a
language for expressing and designing
behavior so everything you're seeing is
custom software often single use custom
software available just for that
situation that's often somehow
interactive or responsive items are
public or the performers or to me and
thematically I'm ultimately driven by
trying to understand the nature of our
reality whether it's ourselves as humans
or the world that we live in and so it
involves thinking about the tools of
science and technology as extensions of
our body as extensions of our mind its
impact on us as individuals its impact
on how we think and how we behave but
ultimately its impact on the world
around us and on society on culture on
ethics on tradition
so I use emerging technologies as both a
subject matter as well as medium I did
set up my philosophies in 2011 and then
I left in 2014 to kind of pursue other
things and the title of my talk is
fundamental frequencies perhaps it's a
bit of a curveball the way I interpreted
the theme of this conference
having seen the wonderful presentation
so far I thought I might address this
discussion around immersion and a rfv
rmr alternate realities by questioning
the nature of reality itself because
that's really where my practice lies and
this might sound very out there and a
bit theoretical but I hope to convey the
practical reasons as to why I'm curious
about this so some of you may recognize
this to be some kind of a wave I'll be
very impressed if anyone can tell me
what it is a wave of this is the same
signal that's been through a
transformations the frequency domain a
Fourier transform
it's a spectrogram again if anyone can
tell me what this is I'll be very very
impressed but when we listen to words we
know what it is it's a piano playing a
single notes and if you have a very
well-trained ear
you might even recognize it to be an a
440 Hertz now what's happening here is
really quite remarkable there's so much
information to begin with
that's out there and these pressure
waves propagate through space and hit
your eardrum and already in the cochlea
this time series signal is transformed
into the frequency domain similar to the
spectrogram and as these signals
propagates through the auditory cortex
you start looking at the ratios between
these dominant frequencies and their
amplitudes
of course you don't do this your brain
does this all that the conscious you is
left with is this very high level very
concise meta information that it's a
piano you the conscious you are
oblivious to all of that extra complex
information surrounding it and the notes
that you detect is what we call the
fundamental frequency you realize that
this is not a chord it's not a violin
playing that note it's not a dog or an
ambulance it's a piano and this is
essentially what I'm interested in how
do we navigate this incredibly complex
world around us and distill it down to
this really really minimal concise
information and I'm interested in what
are the mechanisms that allow this to
happen but also what are the side
effects and so this has led me down many
rabbit holes
of course neuroscience perception
cognition philosophy of mind
consciousness freewill fundamental
physics computer science data science
machine learning AI and in the next 10
minutes I will try to take you through
all of these areas so I had this
realization a few years ago were in 2015
judging by the dates that all of my work
was about waves or God and somehow
quantum mechanics unifies the two I
don't know what I was on when I said
that but looking back I think when I use
the term waves I think what I meant was
the patterns in nature which we humans
have managed within our limited
cognitive abilities to collectively
recognize decipher and formalize into
equations and theories often that we
even somehow find beautiful whatever
that means and when I use the term God I
think I meant those mysterious aspects
of nature which we have yet to
understand and the lengths that we will
go to the stories you will tell to try
and make sense of
and with the term quantum mechanics I
think I meant the fringes of human
knowledge which we empirically somehow
believe to be relatively accurate and we
can maybe understand through the
language of mathematics but we're not
really able to comprehend on a deeper
human level and that's the area where I
find myself oscillating around the most
broadly speaking I think of it as the
intersections of science and
spirituality but really I'm interested
in the collisions between nature science
technology FX ritual tradition and
religion so that previous work I showed
was called simple harmonic motion it's
from 2011 and I've made many
incarnations of it some rather immersive
and a live performance it was from 2015
from in 2014 I made a quite a large
installation with 80 robotic spotlights
and it's the same concept as that video
you saw earlier just applied two moving
lights and this is what you see in here
when you lie down in the middle and look
up at the sky because it's projecting
onto the sky onto the clouds and here
this again it's the same themes of the
idea of complexity emerging from
simplicity is a well-established well
discussed area argue is how the universe
works is how evolution works is how
physics works but what I'm fascinated by
now is how we reverse that process we
take complexity and we'll reduce it
chemistry's abstracted physics biology
is abstracted chemistry etc and all of
this is projected onto the cloud which
is where traditionally God used to live
but now we live in an age of AI and like
discrete the screens of the future that
Rosa pointed out yesterday AI is also
very blue and shiny we live in an era of
machine learning and big data and
computational statistics and to quote
the pioneering nurse and statistician
Florence Nightingale to understand God's
thoughts we must study statistics for
these are the measure of his purpose I'm
really fascinated by the parallels
between the current rise of AI and mass
surveillance with the ultimate
panopticon and that is religion the
all-seeing eye of God and I find it
really fascinating the correlations
historic and current between societies
modes of subsistence the social
structures the ethics values the ethical
frameworks with the qualities and
characteristics of the deities and their
belief systems and I don't just mean the
handful of regions we have today I mean
the thousands of deities and belief
systems we've had over the years and how
they've always co-evolved to match the
needs of the host societies because it
was ancient religions that imposed
omnipotent powers watching over us
judging us protecting us
those were myths fabricated to control
the masses and now as we lose our
spiritual sensibilities and ground
ourselves in materialism and
technological submission our overseer
too was adapting and Co evolving we
don't fear the old gods anymore they
cannot protect or control us so we need
new ones we killed God as Nietzsche says
but we are rebuilding him with
technology to match our techno culture
and he lives up in the cloud of all
places watching over us listening to our
thoughts and dreams in ones and zeroes
we are creating a digital God for our
digital culture so I have been working a
lot with AI lately lately I'm doing a
PhD in it this is an artificial neural
network that's making predictions on
live camera inputs so live camera on the
left and output on the right so this
combines a lot of my motivations on one
hand the very practical
my PhD is in is expressive human machine
interaction how do I as a human author
exercise meaningful control over the
outputs of a generative deep neural
network or any complex computational
system but my key angle here is
continuous meaningful control analogous
to playing a musical instrument but
there's higher level conceptual
motivations here you may have heard
something like style transfer where you
transfer this style of a image into like
a painting onto a photograph this is not
that these are trained on tens of
thousands of images which I scraped from
Flickr so this network has arguably
learned about the structure of this
domain of imagery flowers waves etc but
now when it looks at the world
it looks at my desk it looks at my hands
and it's trying to make sense of what
it's seeing in context of what it's seen
before it's trying to reconstruct the
image three features that it's been
exposed to but it can only see what it
already knows just like us because we to
see things not as they are but as we are
because we are machines that you're in
structure we look for patterns and we
find them and then we project what we
know back onto them it's what we've
always done it's how we survive in the
wild
and it's how we relate to each other we
invent rituals algorithms of the mind
which we use to transform our mental
state and emotional states to otherwise
unattainable modes of being everything
that we see or read or hear even these
sentences I'm saying right now you're
making sense of by relating to your past
experiences to what you've read to where
you come from for what you've lived and
actually I have no idea what any of what
I'm saying means to any of you it's
impossible for me to understand the
world through your eyes so this is an
installation that's also kind of touring
us at the Barbican right now it's a
plinth with a bunch of junk it was very
satisfying to send my tech rider to the
Barbican things is all the junk that I
want and you can play with this junk and
you can spend hours
meticulously crafting your perfect
bouquet or shaping your perfect wave the
models I trained for this installation
are based on the four elements flowers
represents earth ocean represents water
and this fire clouds represents air or
wind and the fifth elements beyond our
planets the ether the void the cosmos
home of the Creator
this model is trained on thousands of
images from the Hubble Space Telescope
and this is actually my favorite model
we might be tempted to think that this
network has learned what distance space
looks like but of course that's not
really accurate and because the Hubble
Space Telescope doesn't give us perfect
photographs which are perfect visual
representations of our space it just
streams numbers and then humans
engineers scientists even artists take
those streams of numbers and interpret
them stitch patches together composite
the layers even colorize them so the
machine is not learning what space
really looks like I don't even know if
that's a valid question what does space
look like the machine is learning a
version of space that is tainted with
our assumptions with our biases with our
romantic visions of what we think space
should look like
and speaking of romantic visions there's
another reason I like this particular
data set and network and video in fact
because I like to be reminded quite
often that the atoms in my body and in
yours in fact everything around us were
forged in the hearts of stars and
supernovae billions of light-years away
billions of years ago and speed across
the galaxies before they very
momentarily come together to be you and
me and to quote one of my key influences
the cosmos is within us we are made of
star stuff we are a way for the universe
to know itself
this is a world so um I'd like to end
with with the last piece which is really
a culmination of everything that I've
been trying to say it's a VR piece well
actually it uses VR technology but it's
about us on VR as one could get I think
and it's about empathy but not empathy
as in VR the empathy machine that again
was was mentioning yesterday but about
the really the impossibility of empathy
that I've already touched upon so the
eyes are often locked into cameras as if
a picture falls on our retina and we see
because that's not how we see at all
it used to be believed that we shoot
fiery Ray's out of our eyes and these
coalesce with the matter out there and
solidify and that gives us the sensation
of seeing even people as smart as Plato
believed this it's a really beautiful
theory of course it's wrong that's not
how seeing happens at all but what I do
like about this extra mission theory of
vision is it really underlines the idea
that seeing is an active process plus
the fovea which is actually high
resolution and full color is actually
tiny it's the size of you know my
thumbnail at arm's length but to me it
seems like my big field of vision is
really really large that's because of
course my eyes is sick aiding our eye
desiccating two or three times a second
and my brain is integrating the motor
signals with the signal that's coming
from my eyes we know it is from the 60s
and 70s Alfred Arbus did some incredible
research with this torture machine he
also found that if you ask people as
question it affects the way they scan
the scene see if you ask people what are
these people talking about how old are
they how are fluence are they it affects
the way the eyes scan the screen
unconsciously so not only do we need to
take actions to perceive the world but
the actions we take affects the meaning
that we take from the scene in front of
us and the final thing I mentioned is
binocular rivalry
it's the phenomenon bit that's been
known for centuries and it's been
studied scientifically surprisingly it
hasn't been studied artistically as much
there have been some enquiries into it
the basic idea is that the brain
integrates all kinds of information from
all of the senses all of the prior
knowledge to provide to your
consciousness a single cohesive percept
if you mess with this then interesting
things happen and this is what actually
hallucinogenics do I used to believe
that hallucinogenics enhance your senses
so like this little crack here might
look like a canyon actually it doesn't
mess with your senses it messes with the
ability of the brain to stitch
everything together to provide a
cohesive percept so what are the certain
different senses jump to your conscious
awareness so if you provide the two eyes
with radically different images or
monocular these similar images as it's
called the brain is unable to provide a
3d percept and what you will see in your
mind's eye is something similar into
that image on the right of course this
will be different for everybody and this
is where it gets really interesting it's
impossible for me to know what you will
see in your mind's eye when you are
presented with these two images
furthermore that image will be animated
it will be morphing again this depends
on your physiology it's impossible for
me to know what you will see so this VR
piece is motivated by these four points
which have just been trying to summarize
this whole presentation what we
perceived to be real is a reconstruction
in our minds it's a simplified model of
the world limited by our biology and
physiology perception is an active
process it requires action and
integration the actions that we take
affects the reality and the meaning that
we construct in our mind a number for
the most important one even when
presented with the exact same
information the same images everybody
will experience something unique
something personal based on who they are
that nobody else can understand and of
course I'm interested in all of this on
a perceptual level which is what these
works explore but ultimately the
motivation for all of this
is higher level I'm from Turkey which
has been torn into over the last 15
years politically and socially by those
who love our dawn and those who despise
him and the level of hatred of these two
groups to each other I frankly find
quiet dangerous and horrifying and I've
been living alien for the last 20 years
where brexit has also similarly torn the
country into two with the level of
resentment between these two factions I
have not seen or heard of before and I
hear here in the states also things
aren't going very smoothly either so
this project and all of these works is
actually a response to that this this is
from 2017 it's a VR installation it
looks like this the installation aspect
is absolutely crucial I fight hard
really really hard every time that I
need the carpets I need the chair I need
the plants I need the candles so that
when you enter the room you know you're
about to go on a journey
hopefully unlike any other journey that
you've gone on at least without any
chemical support and the chair is very
important because the experience is not
nauseating there's no movement but it's
very confusing in fact is painful at the
beginning you have to surrender because
your eyes do try to go in different
directions also a very amount of time
also a very quick excerpts it's very
abstract rivalry drifts in and out this
is about half way through it's a
ten-minute linear experience this is a
mode the different modes of interaction
this particular mode wherever you look
is deformed so the idea that seeing is
an active process and affects the
reality that you can see and before
there's rivalry the image you see feels
physically external to you the same way
all of you feel physically external to
me right now
but as rivalry kicks in the image jumps
inside your head it physically feels
like it's inside your head not like when
you look at a photo a photo is 2d but it
still feels external to your body
when there's rivalry the image is
physically inside your head but we
forget that that's how seeing actually
always is
that's how reality always is that's what
truth actually always is and I'm out of
time so I'll end it there thank you for
your patience
[Applause]
[Music]